Preliminary Draft - Chemoproteomics Section (#17)
dschust-r/review_ms_mem_prot: content/03.chemoproteomics.md

> ## 2. Selective probing of membrane proteins with chemoproteomics {.page_break_before}

Reviewer: Would you like to change the title? I see that you have removed it but not added a suggestion

Author: Ah this was actually not on purpose. Maybe we can look into the title at the end again but I feel like it is fine.

> ## 2. Selective probing of membrane proteins with chemoproteomics {.page_break_before}

Reviewer: I like the introduction and the summary of recent results. In the intro, I would make a better connection to membrane proteins, otherwise the transition is too abrupt. You could also add one summarizing sentence at the end.

Author: Thanks! I will add this as soon as there are some other texts to make everything sound coherent.

Chemoproteomic approaches have enabled the global identification of drug targets and ligand-binding sites, predominantly in soluble proteins within cell lysates.
However, membrane proteins pose significant challenges for chemoproteomic studies due to their low abundance and membrane association, which complicates detection and compromises biological relevance when removing proteins from their native membrane environment.
Recent advances in chemoproteomics have extended its applicability by enabling profiling in living cells and combining it with enrichment strategies.
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) is a foundational chemoproteomic method to quantify the reactivity of amino acid residues in native proteins towards chemical probes and has enabled the identification of highly specific covalent inhibitors and their off-targets. Covalent probes of variable specificity react with amino acids, allowing the assessment of their reactivity by quantifying the relative modification rate at different probe concentrations.

> The incorporation of affinity handles—either directly onto the probe or via a click-chemistry handle—has significantly broadened the utility of ABPP by enabling selective enrichment and identification of labeled peptides.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The incorporation of affinity handles — either directly onto the probe or via a click-chemistry handle — has significantly broadened the utility of ABPP by enabling selective enrichment and identification of labeled peptides.
```

> For example, covalent probes specifically targeting cystein residues on the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), combined with peptide-level enrichment, enabled precise mapping of the probe’s binding site.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, covalent probes specifically targeting cysteine residues on the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), combined with peptide-level enrichment, enabled precise mapping of the probe’s binding site.
```

Notably, two hyperreactive lysine residues were discovered at the protein interface in co-crystal structures of the tyrosine kinase-like orphan receptor 2 and endoglin, exemplifying the functional relevance of surface-exposed lysine residues.
[@DOI:10.1038/s41467-024-47033-w]

To selectively probe cysteine residues in cell membrane proteins, the Cys-Surf platform utilizes broad specifity probe with a two-step enrichment strategy.
After labeling, glycosylated cell surface proteins are enriched using cell surface capture.
Subequently, proteins are proteolytically digested and probe-bound peptides are enriched by clicking a biotin handle to the probe.
At this stage, previously unlabeled cysteines—either due to low native reactivity or oxidative modification—can be labeled using an isotopically tagged probe under reducing conditions, allowing quantification of redox states through isotopic ratios.
Cys-Surf has demonstrated broad utility by recovering targets of FDA-approved covalent drugs, uncovering novel ligandable cysteines at the cell surface and detecting redox changes during T-cell activation. [@DOI:10.1021/jacsau.3c00707]

> To investigate non-covalent interactions, crosslinking approaches can be applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To investigate non-covalent interactions, cross-linking approaches can be applied.
```

Ligands are chemically modified to contain an enrichment handle and a chemically reactive probe which covalently attaches the drug and affinity handle to the interacting proteins.
Diazirine moieties are widely used for photoaffinity labeling in live-cell studies due to their small size, metabolic stability, and ability to form highly reactive intermediates.
Inert under ambient light, diazirines generate a short-lived carbene species upon irradiation with long-wavelength UV light, which covalently reacts with molecules within a few angstroms.

> Leveraging this chemistry, researchers have synthesized cholesterol-based probes—and more recently, a 20(S)-hydroxycholesterol analog—equipped with a diazirine probe and alkyne handle to enable spatially confined crosslinking and subsequent enrichment via click chemistry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Leveraging this chemistry, researchers have synthesized cholesterol-based probes — and more recently, a 20(S)-hydroxycholesterol analog — equipped with a diazirine probe and alkyne handle to enable spatially confined cross-linking and subsequent enrichment via click chemistry.
```

This strategy is particularly powerful due to the inherent challenge of studying interactions of molecules partitioning into membranes using conventional biochemical methods.
Using this approach, several novel interactions were uncovered, including the stereoselective binding to transmembrane protein 97 (TMEM97).
The ability to resolve such selective interactions within the complex lipid environment of the membrane highlights the potential of photoaffinity labeling to uncover biologically relevant targets inside of cellular membranes.
[@DOI:10.1038/s41589-021-00907-2; @DOI:10.1038/nmeth.2368]

Old source list:
[@DOI:10.1101/2024.08.20.608660; @DOI:10.1038/s41467-024-47033-w; @DOI:10.1021/acschembio.2c00648; @DOI:10.1021/acschembio.3c00637; @DOI:10.1021/jacsau.3c00707; @DOI:10.1038/s41589-021-00907-2]

> If you think it is relevent (might be a bit old):

Reviewer: I think this could be relevant but I would not include it and rather use the limited word count to focus on newer results.

Author: Sounds good, I will remove it :)
